[Music]
as you can imagine 400 years ago
navigating the open ocean was difficult
the winds and currents pushed and pulled
ships off course and so sailors base
their directions on the port they left
attempting to maintain an accurate
record of the ship's direction in the
distant sail this process was known as
dead reckoning
because being just half a degree off
could result in sailing right past the
island that lay several miles just over
the horizon this was an easy mistake to
make thankfully three inventions made
modern navigation possible sextants
clocks and the mathematics necessary to
perform the required calculations
quickly and easily all are important
without the right tools many sailors
would be reluctant to sail too far from
the sight of land
John Bird an instrument maker in London
made the first device that could measure
the angle between the Sun and the
horizon during the day called a sextant
knowing this angle was important because
it could be compared to the angle back
in England at the exact same time
comparing these two angles was necessary
to determine the longitude of the ship
clocks came next in 1761 John Harrison
an English clock maker and carpenter
built a clock that could keep accurate
time at sea the timepiece that could
maintain accurate time while on a
pitching yoing deck in harsh conditions
was necessary in order to know the time
back in England there was one catch
though since such a timepiece handmade
it was very expensive so an alternate
method using lunar measurements and
intense calculations was often used to
cut costs the calculations to determine
a ship's location for each measurement
could take hours but sextants and
Clarke's weren't useful unless sailors
could use these tools to determine their
position fortunately in the 1600s an
amateur mathematician had invented the
missing piece john napier toiled for
more than 20 years in his castle in
scotland to develop logarithms a
calculation device
Napier's ideas on logarithms involved a
form of 1 over E and the constant 10 to
the 7th power algebra in the early 1600s
was not fully developed and Napier's
logarithm of one did not equal zero this
made the calculations much less
convenient than logarithms with a base
of 10 Henry Briggs the famous
mathematician at Gresham College in
London read Napier's work in 1614 and
the following year made the long journey
to Edinburgh to meet napier Briggs
showed up unannounced at Napier's Castle
door and suggested that John switched
the base and form of his logarithms into
something much simpler they both agreed
that a base of 10 with the log of 1
equal to 0 would greatly simplify
everyday calculations today we remember
these as Briggs common logarithms
until the development of electric
calculating machines in the 20th century
any calculations involving
multiplication division powers and
extraction of roots with large and small
numbers were done using logarithms the
history of logarithms isn't just a
lesson in math there were many players
responsible for successful navigation
instrument makers astronomers
mathematicians and of course sailors
creativity isn't only about going deep
into one's field of work
it's about cross-pollination between
disciplines to